Putting in the critical path
- The critical path is the longest path, and that's all it means. People often misunderstand this, and they think that the tasks on the critical path are the most difficult or expensive or the most failure-prone tasks. But they're not; they're just the ones that take the longest time to get done. So you can have trivial tasks, like routine paperwork on the critical path, and massive, expensive, important things that aren't on the critical path. So the first thing when drawing a Gantt chart is to put in the critical path. And it's always drawn coming down in steps like this. By the way, I'm using Excel to draw the Gantt charts on this course, but with Microsoft Project, it's similar. So why is it drawn coming down in steps? Well, the main reason is that you then have everything on its own line. So you can have extra columns off to the side for who's doing each task, which department they're in, that sort of thing. It also means that you can show slippage, what has actually happened compared with what should've happened. The main area we want to keep an eye on in terms of slippage is the critical path, because any of those tasks going late means that they'll push everything else late, and then the whole project will end up being delivered late. But floating tasks can also be a problem if they end up slipping, if they go so late that they affect the critical path. Now something that many people don't realize is that you can't really draw the Gantt chart unless you already know the critical path, because everything hangs off it. And the best way to get the critical path is to do a network diagram, which is one of these, quite often produced using Post-its, but you could use a computer to do it. So basically, you find the critical path by just adding up the times as you go across. Computers do it by doing something really complicated called a forward and backward pass. And some people teach that you should do this when you're doing it manually, but personally, I think that's just not necessary. Keep it simple, just look at the diagram. You can easily see what the longest path is. If you try to jump straight to the Gantt chart, you'll miss some dependencies and maybe get the wrong critical path. Even Microsoft Project does it in these two stages, really, but without you knowing. So when you enter tasks straight into the Gantt chart view, it is actually drawing the network diagram in the background. And in fact, you can click and view it if you want. But although this is clever, I actually think it encourages bad habits. If you let the computer draw the network diagram rather than doing it yourself, you run the risk of missing some dependencies, and therefore getting the wrong critical path. And then the foundation of your whole project plan will be wrong. If you start with a network diagram and then make it into a Gantt chart, it'll be quicker in the end than spending ages on your Gantt chart. You'll need about 20 minutes making the network diagram, probably using the Post-its, and then 10 minutes making it into a Gantt chart, and that's all you need, half an hour. And, it will be correct.
-----------
Drawing double-critcal paths, overlap, lead, and lag
- Next, I want to explain a few minor complications that can happen when you're finding and drawing your critical path. For a start, what if there are two critical paths? This happens when you have two equal longest paths through your network diagram. Two tasks, or rows of tasks, that take the same time. And the answer is, it's easy. You just draw them one above the other, like this. Next, what if you have tasks that you want to overlap a little in order to save time? Overlap can be just shown as it is. In my example here, I'm modifying my buildings while still waiting for the last furniture quotations to come in. You just show the rectangles overlapping. But often a better way to show overlap is to granulate the task, which means cut them up into smaller parts. The reason for this is that when you overlap things, you need to know exactly when the second one can start. At what point, halfway through the first task, can we start the second one? So you draw this by either dividing the first or the second task. I'll just give you an example of this using real tasks so you can visualize it. Let's say we're planning to overlap recruiting the staff with recruiting the manager. So halfway through getting the manager, we're going to start getting the staff. We need to know exactly when we're going to start recruiting the staff. So either we divide the manager or the staff down further, as follows. We could divide the manager into selecting the manager, that'd be interviews, et cetera, and then the notice period. We have to wait for the manager to work their notice. So what we would do is, we would say, after we've selected the manager, we can them get him or her to help interview the staff, as well as waiting for their notice period. Or, and I think I prefer this one in this example, we could divide the staff into, say, first and second interviews. And then we say, we can do the first interviews for the staff at the same time as recruiting their manager, but the second interviewers will need to wait until after we've got the manager. So by doing this, we can keep everything clear and simple. Every task has to wait till the previous task is completely finished. None of this wooly, "It's kind of overlapping" stuff. Now, finally, in this section, I want to mention that some people like to use special case dependencies. The good news is that you are unlikely to need to use these, but I think I need to tell you about them just in case you come across them in someone else's project plan. There are four ways tasks can be linked. There's the normal one that we should always use, finish to start. After one task finishes, the next one can start. Then there's start to start. After one task has started, another can start. For example, once this camera is rolling, I can start talking to you. And then there's finish to finish. Once the first thing has finished, maybe your car journey, then the second thing can finish, maybe you wearing your sunglasses. And finally, a very rarely used connection, start to finish, where one thing can only finish after something else has started, like a shift handover or something. But with all of these, it simpler and better to use finish to start, otherwise your plan will just get too confusing. Then there's the time lags that can happen between tasks, sometimes known as lead and lag. If you're doing some painting, you might need to wait for it to dry and then do the next coat. And this could be shown as two hour lag between the two painting tasks. But I think, just show it as three tasks, paint, wait to dry for two hours, and then more painting. Keep it as simple as you can, that's the essence. So, personally, I would avoid unusual dependencies. Just stick to finish to start, and I would avoid lead and lag. But overlapping is important. So thinking about your project, are there any tasks on the critical path that could be overlapped a little in order to get the whole project finished sooner? And if so, can you divide them down to make the overlap point as clear as possible?
------
Estimating times and adding contingency
- [Instructor] It's the critical path that determines the timescale that you're going to promise to your customer. So once you've found it, it's a good idea to double-check your estimates on that critical path, and then add some contingency, because something will go wrong; there will be something you didn't think of. Maybe a task you've forgotten or something changing in one of the tasks on the critical path, but how much contingency should you put in? Well, I would recommend going for halfway between the average and the worst case, which makes you 90% safe. Now, don't worry about where this 90% comes from, there's some maths behind here, but if you go halfway between the average and the worst case, you will be 90% safe, and that means there's just a 10% chance that you'll end up letting a customer down by running late. So, for example, if you have an 11 month project, and you feel that it could easily go late by say, a couple of months, maybe even three or four, then you need to add on half of the worst case, which is another two months, and promise the customer 13 instead of 11. This will be 90% reliable. If you need more than 90% reliability, say if there's a big horrible penalty clause, then you need to add on three or even four months. Then, spread this contingency, these extra two months, through your critical path, adding a little bit to each of the tasks. Why spread it through? Well, partly to hide it, I've got to admit, because if you put it in as one lump, the customer, who might be your boss, will just take it back out again, but also, because you genuinely don't know where the problems will crop up. They really could be anywhere along the line, and when do you add this contingency in? Well, you do it when you convert the Network Diagram to the Gantt chart. You add a bit to each of the critical tasks on the Network Diagram, and then, once it's made into the Gantt chart, the safety margin is built in to your critical path. Now just finally, three things to look out for when you're looking at your Gantt chart and thinking about risk. Number one, if you have lots of one day or one week tasks, it'll never happen. In normal organizations, things never happen a day, a day, a day like that. You might have something that happens in just one day, but if you got several in a row, it's going to take more than three days. Secondly, if the floating tasks are nearly critical. If they're expected to take nearly as long as the critical path, then that's another risk point you need to keep an eye on, and thirdly, if your plan has lots of short tasks at the end, something is likely to go wrong at some point in your project, and then you'll be faced with rushing at the end, but if you already have lots of small tasks at the end, it's not going to be possible to crash anything to get back on track, because they're already really short. So you'll need to add a couple of weeks to a project that looks like this. So, have a look at your Gantt chart now and just check, how sure are you of your estimates of that critical path? Have you spread a bit of extra contingency along it? Are there any floating paths that are nearly critical? And is there a flurry of little tasks planned at the end that might catch you out?
------
Deciding the level of granularity
- Want to mention the concept known as granularity, the degree to which the tasks are broken down. I've already mentioned it briefly in the context of clarifying your plan when you have tasks overlapping. The right level of detail is particularly important to consider if one task is larger than the rest. Also, if you have too many tasks, I would say more than 30 in your plan, then you should use a sub Gantt. This is just a Gantt chart on a separate Excel sheet which shows the detail of the tasks within the one larger task. So you can have a nice clear overview plan. You know the estimates are correct because you have detailed sub Gantts behind them. And when you get to the implementation of those tasks, you can monitor progress in detail by looking at the sub Gantt during each high-level task. It's also good to double-check the connections between tasks as you go. In theory, this is not needed because your network diagram should in theory be correct, but in my experience it's certainly worth doing. You can see in this example that as you draw your Gantt chart, you might want to ponder things like would it to be better to wait till I've bought the site before I start my advertising? Maybe I missed a dependency there. And if I wait till after I've got the manager, then maybe he or she could do the advertising, and maybe the staff could buy their own furniture. There isn't an essential dependency between the staff and the furniture or the manager and the advertising, but these are improvements on the original plan which don't add any overall time to the project, so why not do them? Finally, I would take an overall look at your network diagram and just ask yourself, does it look right? If it's very series with one task after another right across the page, then you've probably been too cautious in your plan. It's going to be very slow. And if it's very parallel with everything happening at the same time, then, yes, it's fast, but is it too risky? Are you sure there aren't any tasks that really should be done one after the other which in fact depend on each other? And if you have lots of one-week tasks as I've mentioned earlier, are you sure that things can happen that quickly? In my experience, things don't often happen in just a week, especially, as I mentioned, if you have a flurry of little tasks at the end. Remember that in reality, you'll probably be running a bit late at the end. You'll be needing to speed things up a bit. And if you've already got lots of small tasks, this is going to be very difficult. I'm not saying your plan is necessarily wrong in any of these cases, but if it has lots of small tasks at the end, it's just that it's likely to run a bit late, so you might want to add a safety margin to the end of it. So just check your plan now and make sure you don't have too many tasks, say over 30, any single tasks that are much longer than the others, or a flurry of small tasks at the end. And does the plan look like a good mix of series and parallel?

----
Putting in and positioning the floating tasks
- Now once you've got the critical path drawn in, you can put in all the floating tasks. This bit is a bit more tricky, but the good news is that if you do make a mistake it'll be on a floating task. And they don't matter nearly as much as the critical tasks. If a floating task takes longer, it probably won't affect your overall project. The key to successfully putting in the floating tasks is first to put in the vertical lines. By this I mean the two constraints that every floating task has. When it can start and when must it be finished. These come from the arrows going into and out of the floating task. So if tasks G, H, and J have to be done before D, then put a vertical line down from the start of D so that we can see that factor clearly. Similarly on my diagram K must be done before D. And L and M come after C. Can you see that vertical line coming down from the end of C? And they have to be done before the start of F. So there's another vertical line at the start of F. Finally, N can be anytime after C is complete and before the finish. Now in order to put the floating tasks in as well as the vertical lines, there are just two other concepts that you need to know. The first one, which we already saw just now, is the idea of sharing a float. G, H, and J were sharing that first bit of float. And L and M were also sharing float. If L takes longer and or starts later, M has less room to maneuver. I think that's fairly common sense. The other concept, slightly more tricky, is that off floaters depending on floaters. This is when the start of a floating or non-critical task depends on the finish of another floating task. Have a look at this diagram. Advertising depends on the trade permit, and yet the trade permit doesn't have a fixed known position. It can be anywhere from us having chosen a country to us buying the site. So we have a floater hanging off a floater. All it means is that we don't know exactly how much float the advertising has. Not that it matters in this case because it has plenty. The next decision is whether to float them earlier or later. So how do I decide if the tasks are going to be done earlier or later within their floatable range? Well, doing them earlier clearly means reduced risk. If they take longer than I thought, then I'm still going to be okay. But doing them later also has advantages. In fact several. It's better for cashflow and sometimes even cost. For example, if I'm employing a person, I'd want to put that off if I could. It's also better if there's a risk of new information coming in. And who has ever down a project where that doesn't happen? And finally you sometimes don't want stuff sitting around. For example, you wouldn't want to by furniture ages before you installed it. But if you do decide to float something a bit later, always leave a small buffer so that if it takes longer you're still okay. If you float it right up against the right-hand constraint, then effectively you've got yourself another critical task. Another task which if it runs late, will make your whole project run late. And then there's resource availability. Look vertically down your Gantt chart, and I'll come back to this later in more detail, if you have too many things all happening at once, you might want to float some of them either earlier or later. Now a final thought, neatness of your Gantt chart. If it's neater then it will be even easier for everyone to understand. So the first thing is to put the floating tasks in time order where possible. Compare these two examples I'm showing you now. I think you'll agree the top one is much easier to get your head around. But the other factor that you might want to consider, and it's rather a weird feature of Gantt charts that they don't have any rule about the vertical order of tasks, there's actually no scale on the vertical access, is that to avoid having the vertical lines crossing, it's usually good to nest the floating tasks, working your way out from the middle. This diagram makes it clear I think. Of course sometimes you can't avoid the verticals crossing. And even if they cross when you could've avoided it, it's not the end of the world. But if you can make it neat it's better.

Enable interactive transcripts



Filter results: in this videoIn this video


----
Putting in and positioning the floating tasks
- Now once you've got the critical path drawn in, you can put in all the floating tasks. This bit is a bit more tricky, but the good news is that if you do make a mistake it'll be on a floating task. And they don't matter nearly as much as the critical tasks. If a floating task takes longer, it probably won't affect your overall project. The key to successfully putting in the floating tasks is first to put in the vertical lines. By this I mean the two constraints that every floating task has. When it can start and when must it be finished. These come from the arrows going into and out of the floating task. So if tasks G, H, and J have to be done before D, then put a vertical line down from the start of D so that we can see that factor clearly. Similarly on my diagram K must be done before D. And L and M come after C. Can you see that vertical line coming down from the end of C? And they have to be done before the start of F. So there's another vertical line at the start of F. Finally, N can be anytime after C is complete and before the finish. Now in order to put the floating tasks in as well as the vertical lines, there are just two other concepts that you need to know. The first one, which we already saw just now, is the idea of sharing a float. G, H, and J were sharing that first bit of float. And L and M were also sharing float. If L takes longer and or starts later, M has less room to maneuver. I think that's fairly common sense. The other concept, slightly more tricky, is that off floaters depending on floaters. This is when the start of a floating or non-critical task depends on the finish of another floating task. Have a look at this diagram. Advertising depends on the trade permit, and yet the trade permit doesn't have a fixed known position. It can be anywhere from us having chosen a country to us buying the site. So we have a floater hanging off a floater. All it means is that we don't know exactly how much float the advertising has. Not that it matters in this case because it has plenty. The next decision is whether to float them earlier or later. So how do I decide if the tasks are going to be done earlier or later within their floatable range? Well, doing them earlier clearly means reduced risk. If they take longer than I thought, then I'm still going to be okay. But doing them later also has advantages. In fact several. It's better for cashflow and sometimes even cost. For example, if I'm employing a person, I'd want to put that off if I could. It's also better if there's a risk of new information coming in. And who has ever down a project where that doesn't happen? And finally you sometimes don't want stuff sitting around. For example, you wouldn't want to by furniture ages before you installed it. But if you do decide to float something a bit later, always leave a small buffer so that if it takes longer you're still okay. If you float it right up against the right-hand constraint, then effectively you've got yourself another critical task. Another task which if it runs late, will make your whole project run late. And then there's resource availability. Look vertically down your Gantt chart, and I'll come back to this later in more detail, if you have too many things all happening at once, you might want to float some of them either earlier or later. Now a final thought, neatness of your Gantt chart. If it's neater then it will be even easier for everyone to understand. So the first thing is to put the floating tasks in time order where possible. Compare these two examples I'm showing you now. I think you'll agree the top one is much easier to get your head around. But the other factor that you might want to consider, and it's rather a weird feature of Gantt charts that they don't have any rule about the vertical order of tasks, there's actually no scale on the vertical access, is that to avoid having the vertical lines crossing, it's usually good to nest the floating tasks, working your way out from the middle. This diagram makes it clear I think. Of course sometimes you can't avoid the verticals crossing. And even if they cross when you could've avoided it, it's not the end of the world. But if you can make it neat it's better.

Enable interactive transcripts



Filter results: in this videoIn this video

------
Putting in and positioning the floating tasks
- Now once you've got the critical path drawn in, you can put in all the floating tasks. This bit is a bit more tricky, but the good news is that if you do make a mistake it'll be on a floating task. And they don't matter nearly as much as the critical tasks. If a floating task takes longer, it probably won't affect your overall project. The key to successfully putting in the floating tasks is first to put in the vertical lines. By this I mean the two constraints that every floating task has. When it can start and when must it be finished. These come from the arrows going into and out of the floating task. So if tasks G, H, and J have to be done before D, then put a vertical line down from the start of D so that we can see that factor clearly. Similarly on my diagram K must be done before D. And L and M come after C. Can you see that vertical line coming down from the end of C? And they have to be done before the start of F. So there's another vertical line at the start of F. Finally, N can be anytime after C is complete and before the finish. Now in order to put the floating tasks in as well as the vertical lines, there are just two other concepts that you need to know. The first one, which we already saw just now, is the idea of sharing a float. G, H, and J were sharing that first bit of float. And L and M were also sharing float. If L takes longer and or starts later, M has less room to maneuver. I think that's fairly common sense. The other concept, slightly more tricky, is that off floaters depending on floaters. This is when the start of a floating or non-critical task depends on the finish of another floating task. Have a look at this diagram. Advertising depends on the trade permit, and yet the trade permit doesn't have a fixed known position. It can be anywhere from us having chosen a country to us buying the site. So we have a floater hanging off a floater. All it means is that we don't know exactly how much float the advertising has. Not that it matters in this case because it has plenty. The next decision is whether to float them earlier or later. So how do I decide if the tasks are going to be done earlier or later within their floatable range? Well, doing them earlier clearly means reduced risk. If they take longer than I thought, then I'm still going to be okay. But doing them later also has advantages. In fact several. It's better for cashflow and sometimes even cost. For example, if I'm employing a person, I'd want to put that off if I could. It's also better if there's a risk of new information coming in. And who has ever down a project where that doesn't happen? And finally you sometimes don't want stuff sitting around. For example, you wouldn't want to by furniture ages before you installed it. But if you do decide to float something a bit later, always leave a small buffer so that if it takes longer you're still okay. If you float it right up against the right-hand constraint, then effectively you've got yourself another critical task. Another task which if it runs late, will make your whole project run late. And then there's resource availability. Look vertically down your Gantt chart, and I'll come back to this later in more detail, if you have too many things all happening at once, you might want to float some of them either earlier or later. Now a final thought, neatness of your Gantt chart. If it's neater then it will be even easier for everyone to understand. So the first thing is to put the floating tasks in time order where possible. Compare these two examples I'm showing you now. I think you'll agree the top one is much easier to get your head around. But the other factor that you might want to consider, and it's rather a weird feature of Gantt charts that they don't have any rule about the vertical order of tasks, there's actually no scale on the vertical access, is that to avoid having the vertical lines crossing, it's usually good to nest the floating tasks, working your way out from the middle. This diagram makes it clear I think. Of course sometimes you can't avoid the verticals crossing. And even if they cross when you could've avoided it, it's not the end of the world. But if you can make it neat it's better.

Enable interactive transcripts



Filter results: in this videoIn this video


---
Using templates
- Sometimes people ask me "hey Chris, please can you send me "an Excel template for a Gantt chart?" And I think, well, not really, because what would it have on it? The tasks down the side have to be theirs and the dates across the top have to be theirs. So what can I send them? I think next time I get this request, I might just send them a blank page, a completely empty Excel workbook. But actually, to be fair, it can be worth keeping a master template for future similar projects. Once you've done a project, similar ones in the future can start to become a process as you use the same plan next time with just the dates changed. Or you could use the most complicated one as your template. And then for each repeat project, you can delete the bits you don't need. But the main thing is keep it simple. Don't have lots of complicated templates for people with automatic macros and stuff because then most people won't understand it, they won't use it, and you'll end up with no project plans at all. So I guess the thing to think about here is would it be worth setting up a template of some sort for your repeating general types of project?

Enable interactive transcripts



Filter results: in this videoIn this video
