
How to leverage a Gantt chart
- The first reason why Gantt charts are great is for communication. And this begins right at the start of your project. If you're asked to do a very easy project, then you can just find out exactly what they want, say yes, go away, plan it and do it. But if your project is at all difficult, which pretty much every project is, then you'll be wanting to find out exactly what they want and then say, "Before I promise anything, "I just need to do a bit of planning, "which I think you'll agree is a reasonable thing "to want to do." You then go away and do the planning, including producing your Gantt chart, which enables you then to come back and say either, "Good news, I can do your project," or less good news, I can do your project, but I'll need a bit longer than you would ideally give me or more money than you want to spend or reduce the specification a little to get it done in the time. So the Gantt chart not only allows you to check that you can do what you're promising, but also, it gives you an arguing tool that you can use with your boss or your customer. It's so simple and intuitive that anyone can understand it. Everyone at the kickoff meeting can see what their part is and they can all commit to doing their part. After the meeting, you email everyone and you say, "Just to confirm that this is the plan "that you're all signed up to," and then they can't let you down later in the project. That email is the best one you'll ever send. So just to make sure that you're really clear on this part, there are two kickoff meetings, one for a discussion on what we're going to have, and then after you've done your planning and got your Gantt chart, one for everyone to sign off the plan, which they've all agreed to. And the Gantt chart is so much better than a list of tasks with start and finish dates. Yes, you could boil the Gantt chart back down to a list of tasks, and you do now know the start and finish date of each task, but why would you do that? Why would you lose all the visualness? A list of tasks doesn't allow you to see the size of the tasks, which ones are critical, what happens if one task goes late, what effect does it have on the others, what are the options for catching the time back up, are there going to be any resource problems where several tasks are happening at the same time, et cetera. And the other thing that's bad about a list of tasks, sorry, but this is a bit of a pet hate of mine. When people say they have a project plan, and then they show me a list of tasks with dates on, I always ask them where they got the dates from, and they never say they got the dates from a Gantt chart. They always say that they made them up. So those start and finish dates are probably wrong. A list is not a project plan. Only a Gantt chart is. So the questions for you are how good are you at kickoff meetings? Do you have them at all? Would it be better if you had two stages instead of just the one meeting? And please tell me that you don't have just a list of tasks with dates on them.

Enable interactive transcripts



Filter results: in this videoIn this video

-----
Using a Gantt chart to plan resources for one project
- The next use for Gantt charts, and it's another thing that there's no other way to do, is to work out what you're going to need in terms of resources. This can be for just your one project or maybe for a number of projects that you're planning to do. Taking this one level at a time, if you're just doing one project, you can use your Excel Gantt chart to add up the columns vertically and just check that the totals don't exceed the number of hours or people that you have available. You can see in this example here, I've added up the columns and I've got a rather busy patch around Week 24. And I could ask myself whether I can cope with that. What if I can't? Well, the obvious first option is to slide the floating tasks forward or back, which you can see on my diagram, makes a huge difference. The resource plan, also known as a loading plan, is much better now, much more evenly distributed. If sliding the floating tasks around doesn't make enough difference, then the only other options are to either get more resources or, and this is a bit of a crime, a bit of a last resort, you could break the critical path and just take longer over the whole project. So your units of measure for this resource plan could be hours per week or person days per week or month or the number of people, perhaps the full-time equivalents per week or month. But what about when you've got more than one project? I want to give you an example of this. A friend of mine is IT Director of a large company. He has a team of about 50 people and about 30 projects on the go at any one time. And every month, he goes to the monthly management meeting, it's him and all the other directors. And they ask him how certain projects are getting on, "How's the bar code reading project getting on?" And he says, "Oh, it's going really well, yeah, "it's going to be ready by the 17th of July." He actually hasn't a clue, he just makes it up, it's just a complete guess. And when I discovered this, I just was scandalized, I couldn't believe he's just making dates up. And I said to him, "You're going to get caught." And he said, "No, no, it'll be all right," 'cause he said, "What I do after the meeting "is I go back to all my people and I say, "'All of you guys, can you all get onto "'the bar code project straightaway,' "so they all work on that. "So of course, when July comes, they've done it." But he said, "Occasionally, when July comes, "we haven't done it, but they don't notice, "'cause they've gone on to the next flavor of the month "by then anyway, so they don't check." But he said, "Very occasionally, they do check "and I haven't done it, and they go, "'Oh, what happened with this bar code reading, "'why isn't it ready?'" And then he just baffles them with science. He just says, "Oh yes, we had terrible problems "reconfiguring the server protocol stack architecture, "but I've got my best team on it, "and it'll be ready by the 11th of August." And that's how he gets out of trouble. And I was just thinking, this is mad, because he's promising everything to these people and failing quite often and he's taking all the strain on himself, all that risk of being caught. But not only that, but as a group of people, they're not able to make proper decisions, because ideally, he would be able to say to them, "I can't do all the projects, "which one do you want?" And they could then have a proper prioritization discussion about which projects they really want to have. At the moment, they just ask for everything, he promises everything, and then doesn't deliver it. And you're probably laughing about this, but actually, I wonder whether your company is similar, 'cause I think most organizations don't have a big master plan like this, they don't actually have a Gantt of Gantts. So what he needed was a Gantt of Gantts like this. This would have allowed him to say things like, "You can't have Project E until September, "unless you want me to move it forward, "but then you can't have Project D until later." At least he would then have real dates for every project. He wouldn't just be saying yes to everything and hoping that they don't notice that he hasn't done it all.

----
A Gantt of Gantts
- Let's just have a quick look at this Gantt of Gantts. Tell me about project A. Yeah, that's right, it's completed, as indeed it should be. Now, what about project B? Yeah, you can clearly see, it's running a bit late. It should be 90% complete by now, and it's only about 70%. What about project C? Well, you can clearly see that for some reason, it's ahead of schedule. Now, what about project D? Yeah, that's right, it hasn't been started, when it should have been. And again, we can find out why. Now, why do you think I've put on project E, F, and G? And of course, it's because I'm looking at all of them and wondering if I can do them all at the same time. And if I can't, I can have that conversation with my boss, or maybe the three different people who want those projects, and ask them which one I should do first, or which one needs to be, is going to have to be, pushed back until later. It's not up to me to decide, I'll do whatever they want, but they have to decide on their priorities between them. And I can just sit back and let them fight it out. So, it shows me the past and the future. The past, have I done what I should have done? And the future, can I do what I want to do? The reality of your Gantt of Gantts is that each of these shapes would probably just be a line on a spreadsheet, a line of numbers, which you can then add up. So how would you actually produce it? Well, there are two ways, the ideal way and the actual way that you would probably do it. The ideal way is to have a Gantt chart for every project, and then take the total from the bottom of each one, copy them all onto your Gantt of Gantts summary. The actual way that you would probably do it is to guess it. This is not as bad as it sounds. You would say, I reckon project A is about one person for four weeks, and I reckon project B is about two people for six weeks, et cetera. So the Gantt of Gantts is going to be fairly rough, but still massively better than having nothing at all.

----
Resource planning
- There are three levels of resource planning. The network diagram made with posted notes, which assumes infinite capacity. Then the basic Gantt chart, which looks at capacity for just that one project in isolation. And then the Gantt of Gantts, which looks at the big picture of the team or department or the company as a whole. But what if you have specialist resources, maybe computer programmers or engineers or lawyers or something that can do one project but not another. This is a difficult problem because it's a cube. You've got a cube of projects, time and resource type, so a normal spreadsheet can't easily show it. But there are two principles that you can use to help solve this problem of which order to do your projects. First, you could take one slice of the cube, once you know what your bottleneck resource is, and just look at time and projects for that one resource. So this will look like the Gantt of Gantts that I showed earlier for that resource. If you don't know what the bottleneck is, and by the way, it is often IT, you could do a Gantt of Gantts for just your part of the company. At least your area will be properly planned then. But it's best to find the bottleneck by adding up all of the work for the year. And then you can see who can't cope with the expected workload and that's your bottleneck. If you have several areas that can't cope with the work they have to do for the year, then the bottleneck is whoever is struggling most because if you spread it out for them, then the others will all be okay too. So take the slice for that and just do a resource plan for them and work out which projects you're going to have to push out into the future, keep shoving projects out into the next year until the plan looks doable. The other principle is to identify the work that can't be moved. So you add up the can't be moved jobs to get a required resource profile, these the unavoidably required resources. And then you can take this away from the available total resource to see how much or how little resource you have left for all the rest of the work. Then you can work out how you will fit the rest in, and they might have to be spread way into the future.

----
Monitoring progress with a Gantt chart
- Probably the easiest and yet most underrated use for a Gantt chart is to monitor the progress of your project. People often produce the Gantt chart in order to get the okay for the project and then they never use it again. What a waste, all that effort to make it, and then they don't use it to keep track of how the project is doing. Keeping track is done by coloring in what you've done so far and comparing your progress with the Now or Today line. So how often should you color in what you've done? Well, probably monthly, but it could be weekly if your project is a short, fast-moving one. The great thing about the colored in Gantt chart is that it brings the pain forward. Otherwise, you don't know you've got a problem until the finish line is in sight and you can then see that you aren't going to make it, by which time it's too late to do anything about it. But if you know ages before that you're maybe a week behind, catching back up then only requires a very small increase in speed for the rest of the project. Now with coloring in, you need to know that there are two ways to do it. There's Proportional Coloring, where if you've done half a task, you color in half of it, and then there's Color When Complete, where you don't color in any any of it until the whole task is done. Which one do you prefer? Proportional Coloring tells you more, but is prone to self-delusion. Color When Complete is always correct, but you don't know how much is being done until suddenly, it's colored in at the end. So which one to pick? Well, Granularity solves the problem. If you divide a long task into bits, you can then use Color When Complete and still know exactly what's going on. Color When Complete plus Granularity, that's what I prefer. And remember that you can always have your sub-Gantt for a longer task stored on a separate page so that you can do your Proportional Coloring on your high-level plan and it will be pretty much accurate. So if I only had one minute to check on your project, if I only had time to ask one question, my question would be, "Please can I see your colored-in Gantt chart?" And if you say, "Uh, what's a Gantt chart?" then I would worry, because if I ask you about how the project's going, you're just going to tell me stories. "Oh yes, we've got the foundations built." "Oh yes, we found a great new supplier." And I'm going to be thinking, well, that's all very jolly, but should they have done more than that by now, I don't know. Only a colored-in Gantt chart tells me what I want to know. And if you've got several projects on the go at once, you can't possibly hope to hold them all in your head. A Gantt chart for each one is easily the best way to keep an eye on the progress of all of them. So for your projects, do you have them all colored in as you progress, so you can easily check the progress of each one at a glance? Do you think it would be a good idea to have this?
------
Assessing risk with a Gantt chart
- The Gantt chart is also helpful when you're thinking about risk, what might possible go wrong with the project that you're planning. For assessing the risk of lateness, you really only need to check the tasks on the critical path. They are, by far, the most likely cause of lateness for your project. Although, if there are any noncritical tasks that are nearly critical, they have a very small amount of float, then you might want to keep an eye on them as well. For risk of cost overspend, you need to think about the cost risks of all the tasks. Any task, critical or not, that ends up costing more than you expected will take you over budget. You could have extra columns by the side of the Gantt chart for risks, although normally they would be on a separate page because you might have more than one risk for a particular task. So you would list how likely and serious the potential problems are and then add your mitigation plans for making these potential problems less likely and less serious. Sometimes there's an iteration required. You need to go back and add more tasks in order to prevent risks. For example, you might have realized you need to insert, buy, and install fire extinguishers. So your Gantt chart might have to be modified after you thought you'd finished it. But it's not usually difficult to go back and add in a couple of extra tasks. So to sum up this little section on risk, I want you to ask yourself, have you looked at the risks for your project, both in terms of time and money? Do you have enough mitigation plans in place?
------
Assessing risk with a Gantt chart
- The Gantt chart is also helpful when you're thinking about risk, what might possible go wrong with the project that you're planning. For assessing the risk of lateness, you really only need to check the tasks on the critical path. They are, by far, the most likely cause of lateness for your project. Although, if there are any noncritical tasks that are nearly critical, they have a very small amount of float, then you might want to keep an eye on them as well. For risk of cost overspend, you need to think about the cost risks of all the tasks. Any task, critical or not, that ends up costing more than you expected will take you over budget. You could have extra columns by the side of the Gantt chart for risks, although normally they would be on a separate page because you might have more than one risk for a particular task. So you would list how likely and serious the potential problems are and then add your mitigation plans for making these potential problems less likely and less serious. Sometimes there's an iteration required. You need to go back and add more tasks in order to prevent risks. For example, you might have realized you need to insert, buy, and install fire extinguishers. So your Gantt chart might have to be modified after you thought you'd finished it. But it's not usually difficult to go back and add in a couple of extra tasks. So to sum up this little section on risk, I want you to ask yourself, have you looked at the risks for your project, both in terms of time and money? Do you have enough mitigation plans in place?
------
Forecasting spend with a Gantt chart
- The final use for Gantt charts that I want to tell you about is predicting spend. Before you start your project, the Gantt chart will allow you to easily generate a spend curve. This is what you will spend when and it's based on what you expect to be doing when. If you put the costs along each bar of the Gantt chart, then you can add it all up vertically to get your expected spend in each week or month. The Gantt chart is the only way to generate a predicted spend curve because it's the only way to know what you'll be doing when. Then, as you go along, your first task is to work out whether you are overspending or not. This may not be as obvious as you think because time and money can get mixed up in the accounting for cost. For example, if you're underspent comparing what you've spent so far with what you expected to have spent on the project so far by this date, then it probably means you're behind schedule. You haven't spent the money because you haven't done the work. And if you're overspent, it probably means you're overspent. And by the way, being behind schedule probably means you'll end up overspent because you're behind for a reason. There have been problems of some sort. So, you're not only late, but heading towards being overspent at the end. So, overspent means overspent and underspent means late, which means overspent. You always lose, but in a way this is obvious because any deviation from the plan is going to mean that you spend more than the plan because hopefully the plan was to do the project the best and most efficient way. So to unpick progress and spend, you need to check your colored in Gantt chart. Looking at just spend tells you nothing. There is no way to tell the difference between underspent and late, but as soon as you look at the Gantt chart the difference is obvious.
------
Forecasting challenge
- So, once you've worked out what's happening at the moment in your project, the next question is to work out what's going to happen in the future? Your objective is to estimate what's often known as the FCC. This is the Forecast Cost at Completion. And you got to estimate this from a combination of the progress in the spend. The main question is whether your problems are going to continue at the same rate in the second half of your project, or whether they are all in the past now. Let's do an example. Have a look at this simple project. It's just four tasks, A, B, C, and D, done one after the other. You can see that the total cost is 70 plus 30 plus 100 plus 160, which comes to 360. And the total expected time is five plus six plus three plus eight, which is 22 weeks. Okay, so we're going to spend 360 over 22 weeks. Now, suppose that 16 weeks have been used up and we've done A and B and we've spent 150. How are we doing? Well, I think you'll agree, not very well. A and B should have only taken 11 weeks, not 16, and they should have only cost 100, not the 150 that we have spent. So we're doing badly on both time and money. But the accountants have a totally different view. They're expecting us to have done A, B, C, and a quarter of D by now because 16 weeks have passed and A, B, and C were meant to take 14 weeks and then that's two more weeks for us to have done a quarter of D. So they will have expected us to have spent 70 for A, 30 for B, 100 for C and a quarter of D, which is another 40, so that's 240 by now. They expect us to have spent 240 and yet we've only spent 160. They think we're underspent, because they don't know how little work we've actually done. So now I want you to see if you can work out the following. What do you think the project will end up costing and when do you forecast it will be finished, both as an optimist and a pessimist? This optimist, pessimist question sounds like it's going to make the question harder, but actually, it makes it easier because it helps you to keep your thinking clear. So, have a go at this question and then when you restart it, I'll tell you how to work out the answer.
-------
Forecasting solution
- You're back. I wonder what answers you came up with for the cost and the time. Well, here's the answer explained. Let's do the money first. Now the Optimist is going to say, "A and B should have cost 100, "but we've spent 150 on them. "We're over by 50, but assuming we get back onto plan, "we'll spend another 260 on C and D, "ending up with a total cost of 410." That's the Optimist back onto plan. The Pessimist will say, "We've been spending "at a rate of one and a half times the plan." By the way, this is sometimes known as the cost performance index, or CPI, and it is 1.5. So 1.5 times 360 means that overall we're going to spend 540. So, that's the Pessimist view, carrying on as badly as we have been in the first half. Now let's look at the time. It's the same calculation, really. The Optimist says, "A and B should have taken 11, "but we've taken 16, we're late by five. "But assuming we get back onto plan, "we'll take another 11 weeks on C and D, "ending up with a total of 27." Did you get that? The Pessimist, again, they're going to say, "Well the first half took 16 instead of 11, "so the second half will probably also "take 16 instead of 11, which gives a total of 32, "instead of 22 weeks." By the way, a more correct way to describe this calculation is to say that we've been progressing at a rate of 11 over 16 compared to the plan. So, the whole job should have taken 22, but at this slow a rate it's going to take 22 times 16 over 11, which gives us 32 weeks. But who is right, the optimist or the pessimist? Well, it's probably going to be somewhere in-between, but if you want to know which end to pick, only knowledge of what went wrong with A and B will tell you which of the two views to take for the rest of the project. Only you, the project manager know, whether those problems are likely to repeat again in the second half or not. So, for your project, do you know how much you've spent so far, and have you compared it to what you should have spent? And have you separated out the spend from the progress by comparing the money with the Gantt chart? And finally, what is your forecast completion date and your forecast cost at completion?
-----
Five common mistakes to look out for
- So finally, I want to give you a list of my top five mistakes to look out for. And number one is jumping straight to the Gantt chart. Always make a network diagram first so that you can be sure that you've got the correct critical path. Mistake number two is getting the wrong level of granularity. Too little makes your plan too high-level and impossible to estimate, and too much makes your plan too complicated with too many tasks. But once you know about the concept of granularity and the fact that you can have a sub-Gantt for any larger tasks, you should be able to get this right. The third mistake to look out for is forgetting contingency. Remember to always put some in, spread along the critical path. The fourth mistake is neglecting the Gantt chart once you've started. It's easy to keep it colored in as you go, and it will certainly save you a lot of pain towards the finish date. And the final mistake to avoid is changing your plan more than once. Customers worry if you keep changing your plan. You get one shot, and you should do this about halfway through and ask for plenty so that you don't have to come back later and ask for more. So now you know what to look out for, and if you avoid these, you'll be in good shape
